---
layout: default
title: Command Usage - Reference Manual - csvq
category: reference
---

# Command Usage

```
csvq [options] [subcommand] ["query"|argument]
```

* [Execution of Statements](#execution)
* [Options](#options)
* [Subcommands](#subcommands)
* [Configurations](#configurations)
* [Special Characters](#special_characters)

## Execution of Statements
{: #execution}

There are three ways to execute a query or statements.

```bash
# Pass to the csvq command as an argument
$ csvq "SELECT id, name FROM users"

# Load from file
$ cat statements.sql
VAR @id := 0;
SELECT @id := @id + 1 AS id,
       name
  FROM users;

$ csvq -s statements.sql

# Execute in the interactive shell
$ csvq
csvq > SELECT id, name FROM users;
+----+-------+
| id | name  |
+----+-------+
| 1  | Louis |
| 2  | Sean  |
+----+-------+
csvq > UPDATE users SET name = 'Mildred' WHERE id = 2;
1 record updated on "/home/mithrandie/docs/csv/users.csv".
csvq > SELECT id, name FROM users;
+----+----------+
| id | name     |
+----+----------+
| 1  | Louis    |
| 2  | Mildred  |
+----+----------+
csvq > COMMIT;
Commit: file "/home/mithrandie/docs/csv/users.csv" is updated.
csvq >
```


## Options
{: options}

--repository PATH, -r PATH
: Directory Path where files are located. The default is the current directory.

--timezone value, -z value
: Default Timezone. The default is _Local_.
  
  _Local_, _UTC_ or a timezone name in the IANA TimeZone database(in the form of _"Area/Location"_. e.g. _"America/Los_Angeles"_).
  
  > The timezone database is required in order to use the timezone names.
  > Most Unix-like systems provide the database.
  > But if your system does not provide it and you have not installed Go Lang, then you must put the database file named [zoneinfo.zip](https://golang.org/lib/time/) to the directory "$ZONEINFO" or "$GOROOT/lib/time/". 

--datetime-format value, -t value
: Datetime Format to parse strings.
  Format string is the same as the function [DATETIME_FORMAT]({{ '/reference/datetime-functions.html#datetime_format' | relative_url }}).
  
  This option can be specified multiple formats using JSON array of strings.

--wait-timeout value, -w value
: Limit of the waiting time in seconds to wait for locked files to be released. The default is 10.

--source FILE, -s FILE
: Load query or statements from FILE.

--delimiter value, -d value    
: Field delimiter for CSV or delimiter positions for Fixed-Length Format. The default is a comma(U+002C `,`).
  
  For Fixed-Length Format, You can specify "SPACES" or a JSON Array of integers.
  "SPACES" splits lines automatically by spaces.
  JSON Array is used to specify delimiter positions explicitly.
  
  Delimiter positions indicate the number of bytes from the start of the line.
  For example, JSON Array "[5, 10, 15]" splits "1234567890abcde" as "12345, 67890, abcde" 

--json-query QUERY, -j QUERY
: [QUERY]({{ '/reference/json.html#query' | relative_url }}) for JSON data passed from standard input.

--encoding value, -e value
: File encoding. Following encodings are supported. The default is _UTF8_. 

  | value(case ignored) | character encoding |
  | :- | :- |
  | UTF8 | UTF-8 |
  | SJIS | Shift JIS |
  
  > JSON Format is supported only UTF-8.

--no-header, -n
: Import the first line as a record.

  First line of a CSV file is dealt with as the header line. In case "--no-header" option passed, 
  fields are automatically named as "c" and following sequential number. e.g. "c1", "c2", "c3", ...

--without-null, -a
: Parse empty fields as empty strings.

  In most cases CSV fields are imported as string values, but no-quoted empty fields are imported as nulls.
  By using the "--without-null" option, no-quoted empty fields are imported as empty string values.

--out FILE, -o FILE
: Export query results and logs to FILE.

  If the output file is not specified, the results and logs are exported to standard output.  

--format value, -f value
: Format of query results. The default is _TEXT_.

  | value(case ignored) | description |
  | :- | :- |
  | CSV   | Comma separated values. Separetor can be changed by -D option. |
  | TSV   | Tab separated values |
  | FIXED | Fixed-Length Format |
  | JSON  | JSON with special characters escaped with backslashes(U+005C `\`) |
  | GFM   | Text Table for GitHub Flavored Markdown |
  | ORG   | Text Table for Emacs Org-Mode |
  | TEXT  | Text Table for console |
  | JSONH | Alias of "--format JSON --json-escape HEX" |
  | JSONA | Alias of "--format JSON --json-escape HEXALL" |
  
--write-encoding value, -E value
: Character encoding of query results. The default is _UTF8_.

--write-delimiter value, -D value
: Field delimiter for CSV or delimiter positions for Fixed-Length Format in query results.

  For Fixed-Length Format, You can specify "SPACES" or a JSON Array of integers.
  
  Delimiter positions indicate the number of bytes from the start of the line.
  If the field value is shorter than the length of the field, the missing part is padded with SPACE(U+0020).  
  For example, JSON Array "[5, 10, 15]" combines "123, abc, def" into "␣␣123abc␣␣def␣␣". 

--without-header, -N
: When without the header line in query results.

--line-break value, -l value
: Line break in query results. One of following values. The default is _LF_.

  | value(case ignored) | unicode character |
  | :- | :- |
  | CRLF | U+000D Carriage Return and U+000A Line Feed |
  | CR   | U+000D Carriage Return |
  | LF   | U+000A Line Feed |

--enclose-all, -Q
: Enclose all string values in CSV.

--json-escape, -J
: JSON escape type. The default is _BACKSLASH_. 

  | value(case ignored) | unicode character |
  | :- | :- |
  | BACKSLASH | Escape special characters with backslashes(U+005C `\`) |
  | HEX       | Escape special characters with six-character sequence |
  | HEXALL    | Escape all strings with six-character sequence |

  > [Escaped characters in JSON](#escaped_characters_in_json)

--pretty-print, -P
: Make JSON output easier to read in query results.

--east-asian-encoding, -W
: Count ambiguous characters as fullwidth. If not, then that characters are counted as halfwidth.

--count-diacritical-sign, -S
: Count diacritical signs as halfwidth. If not, then that characters are counted as zero-width.

--count-format-code, -A
: Count format characters and zero-width spaces as halfwidth. If not, then that characters are counted as zero-width.

--color, -c
: Use ANSI color escape sequences.

--quiet, -q
: Suppress operation log output.

--cpu, -p
: Hint for the number of cpu cores to be used. The default is the half of the number of cpu cores.

--stats, -x
: Show execution time and memory statistics.
  
  Query Execusion Time
  : execution time of one query. select, insert, update, or delete queries are measured.
  
  TotalTime
  : total execution time
  
  Alloc
  : bytes of allocated heap objects
  
  TotalAlloc
  : cumulative bytes of allocated heap objects
  
  HeapSys
  : bytes of heap memory obtained from the OS
  
  Mallocs
  : cumulative count of heap objects allocated
  
  Frees
  : cumulative count of heap objects freed

--help, -h
: Show help

--version, -v
: Print the version

> Some of command options can be specified in statements by using [Set Flag Statements]({{ '/reference/flag.html' | relative_url }}).

## Subcommands
{: #subcommands}

| subcommand | description |
|:-|:-|
| [fields](#fields) | Show fields in file |
| [calc](#calc)     | Calculate value from stdin |
| help, h           | Shows help |

### Fields Subcommand
{: #fields}

Show fields in a file.
```bash
csvq [options] fields CSV_FILE_PATH
```

### Calc Subcommand
{: #calc}

Calculate a value from stdin.
```bash
csvq [options] calc "expression"
```

In the expression, the value from stdin is represented as "c1".

Example:
```bash
$ echo 'foo' | csvq calc "base64_encode(c1)"
Zm9v
$ echo 123 | csvq calc "c1 + 100"
223
```

## Configurations
{: #configurations}

Before an execution of csvq, the following processings will be performed.

1. Load Environment Configurations.
2. Execute Pre-Load Statements.
3. Overwrite Flags with Command Options.

### Environment Configurations

Configuration Files are loaded in the following order.

1. HOME_DIRECTORY/.csvq_env.json
2. HOME_DIRECTORY/.csvq/csvq_env.json
3. HOME_DIRECTORY/.config/csvq/csvq_env.json
4. CURRENT_DIRECTORY/csvq_env.json

Download a JSON file from [https://github.com/mithrandie/csvq/blob/master/csvq_env.json](https://github.com/mithrandie/csvq/blob/master/csvq_env.json) and put it to the above paths.
If the files exists in the multiple paths, then all existing files will be loaded and configuration items are overwritten with the values in the file that is loaded later.

#### Configuratin Items in JSON

| Item | Format |
| :-- | :-- |
| datetime_format                     | array of strings |
| interactive_shell.history_file      | string |
| interactive_shell.history_limit     | number |
| interactive_shell.prompt            | string |
| interactive_shell.continuous_prompt | string |
| environment_variables               | object{var_name: string} |
| palette.effectors                   | object{effect_name: effect_object} |

##### Interactive Shell

###### History File

File name to save command history. If it is a relative path, then the path is interpreted as a relative path from your home directory.
On UNIX-like systems, you can use environment variable such as $HOME or ${HOME} to specify the path.
If not, '~' can be used to represent home directory.

###### History Limit

Max length of command history.
If _history_limit_ is set to -1, then the command history is disabled.

###### Prompt, Continuous Prompt

Appearance of the prompt on the interactive shell.
You can embed some expressions in the appearance by [using a Dollar Sign(U+0024 `$`) and Curly Brackets(U+007B, U+007D `{}`)]({{ '/reference/external-command.html#embedded-expression' | relative_url }})

##### Effect Object

###### Effects

Effects are specified with an array of strings. Following strings are supported.

- Reset Bold Faint Italic Underline SlowBlink RapidBlink ReverseVideo Conceal CrossedOut

###### Colors

Foreground and background colors are specified with one of the following values.

8 Color (String)
: Following strings are supported.
  
  - Black Red Green Yellow Blue Magenta Cyan White BrightBlack BrightRed BrightGreen BrightYellow BrightBlue BrightMagenta BrightCyan BrightWhite DefaultColor

256 Color (Number)
: Color number from 0 to 255.

RGB Color (Array of 3 numbers)
: The first element is the intensity of red between 0 and 255, the second is green, and the third is blue.


### Pre-Load Statements

Files in whitch statements are written will be loaded and executed in the following order.

1. HOME_DIRECTORY/.csvqrc
2. HOME_DIRECTORY/.csvq/csvqrc
3. HOME_DIRECTORY/.config/csvq/csvqrc
4. CURRENT_DIRECTORY/csvqrc


## Special Characters
{: #special_characters}

In command parameters and statements, following strings represent special characters.  

| string | unicode character |
| :- | :- |
| \a   | U+0007 Bell |
| \b   | U+0008 Backspace |
| \f   | U+000C Form Feed |
| \n   | U+000A Line Feed |
| \r   | U+000D Carriage Return |
| \t   | U+0009 Horizontal Tab |
| \v   | U+000b Vertical Tab |
| \\"  | U+0022 Double Quote (in strings only) |
| \\'  | U+0027 Single Quote (in strings only) |
| \\\` | U+0060 Grave Accent (in identifiers only) |
| \\\\ | U+005c Backslash |


### Escaped Characters in JSON output
{: #escaped_characters_in_json}

| character | BACKSLASH | HEX | HEXALL |
|:-|:-|:-|:-|
| U+0022 quotation mark  | \\"   | \u0022 | \u0022 |
| U+005C reverse solidus | \\\\  | \u005C | \u005C |
| U+002F solidus         | \/    | \u002F | \u002F |
| U+0008 backspace       | \b    | \u0008 | \u0008 |
| U+000C form feed       | \f    | \u000C | \u000C |
| U+000A line feed       | \n    | \u000A | \u000A |
| U+000D carriage return | \r    | \u000D | \u000D |
| U+0009 tab             | \t    | \u0009 | \u0009 |
| U+0000 - U+001F        | \uXXXX| \uXXXX | \uXXXX |
| - U+FFFF               | N/A   | N/A | \uXXXX |
| U+10000 -              | N/A   | N/A | \uXXXX\uXXXX (UTF-16 surrogate pair) |

