---
layout: default
title: Value Types - Reference Manual - csvq
category: reference
---

# Value Types

* [Primitive Types](#primitive_types)
  * [String](#string)
  * [Integer](#integer)
  * [Float](#float)
  * [Boolean](#boolean)
  * [Ternary](#ternary)
  * [Datetime](#datetime)
  * [Null](#null)
* [Field Reference](#field_reference)
* [Calculation](#calculation)
  * [Arithmetic Operation](#arithmetic_operation)
  * [String Operation](#string_operation)
  * [Function](#function)
  * [Subquery](#subquery)
  * [Variable](#variable)
  * [Variable Substitution](#variable_substitution)
  * [Parentheses](#parentheses)
* [Control Flow](#control_flow)
  * [Case](#case)
* [Filter Condition](#filter_condition)
  * [Comparison Operation](#comparison_operation)
  * [Logic Operation](#logic_operation)
* [Cursor Status](#cursor_status)
  * [Cursor Is Open](#cursor_is_open)
  * [Cursor Is In Range](#cursor_is_in_range)
* [Automatic Type Casting](#automatic_type_casting)


## Primitive Types
{: #primitive_types}

### String
{: #string}

Character strings encoded in UTF-8.

### Integer
{: #integer}

64-bit sined integers.

### Float
{: #float}

64-bit floating point numbers.

### Boolean
{: #boolean}

Boolean values. true or false.

### Ternary
{: #ternary}

Values of three-valued logic. TRUE, UNKNOWN or FALSE.

### Datetime
{: #datetime}

Values of Date and time with nano seconds.

### Null
{: #null}

Representations of missing values.

## Field Reference
{: #field_reference}

References to fields in tables.

A field reference is represented by a column name or a table name and a column name joined with a full stop(U+002E).

```sql
id      -- column name only
user.id -- table name and column name
```

## Calculation
{: #calculation}

A Caluculation returns a value of any primitive type.

### Arithmetic Operation
{: #arithmetic_peration}

[Arithmetic Operators]({{ '/reference/arithmetic-operators.html' | relative_url }})

### String Operation
{: #string_peration}

[String Operators]({{ '/reference/string-operators.html' | relative_url }})

### Function
{: #function}

* [Aggregate Functions]({{ '/reference/aggregate-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [Logical Functions]({{ '/reference/logical-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [String Functions]({{ '/reference/string-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [Numeric Functions]({{ '/reference/numeric-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [DateTime Functions]({{ '/reference/datetime-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [Cryptographic Hash Functions]({{ '/reference/cryptographic-hash-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [Cast Functions]({{ '/reference/cast-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [System Functions]({{ '/reference/system-functions.html' | relative_url }})
* [Analytic Functions]({{ '/reference/analytic-functions.html' | relative_url }})

### Subquery
{: #subquery}

[Select Query]({{ '/reference/select-query.html' | relative_url }}) enclosed in parentheses.

A result set of a subquery must have exactly one field and at most one record.
If the result set has no record, that subquery returns null.

### Variable
{: #variable}

[Variable]({{ '/reference/variable.html' | relative_url }})

### Variable Substitution
{: #variable_substitution}

[Variable Substitution]({{ '/reference/variable.html#substitution' | relative_url }})

### Parentheses
{: #parentheses}

Values enclosed in parentheses.

Parentheses are used to specify the order of operations.

## Control Flow
{: #control_flow}

### Case
{: #case}

#### Case syntax with condition

```sql
CASE
  WHEN condition THEN result
  [WHEN condition THEN result ...]
  [ELSE result]
END
```

_condition_
: value

_result_
: value

This syntax returns the _result_ of the first WHEN expression that _condition_ is TRUE.
If no condition is TRUE, return the _result_ of the ELSE expression or null if there is no ELSE expression.


#### Case syntax with comparison

```sql
CASE value
  WHEN compare THEN result
  [WHEN compare THEN result ...]
  [ELSE result]
END
```

_value_
: value

_compare_
: value

_result_
: value

This syntax returns the _result_ of the first WHEN expression that _compare_ is equal to _value_.
If no _compare_ is match, return the _result_ of the ELSE expression or null if there is no ELSE expression.

## Filter Condition
{: #filter_condition}

A Filter Condition returns a ternary value.

### Comparison Operation
{: #comparison_operation}

[Comparison Operators]({{ '/reference/comparison-operators.html' | relative_url }})

### Logic Operation
{: #logic_operation}

[Logic Operators]({{ '/reference/logic-operators.html' | relative_url }})

## Cursor Status
{: #cursor_status}

### Cursor Is Open
{: #cursor_is_open}

```sql
CURSOR cursor_name IS [NOT] OPEN
```

_cursor_name_
: [identifier]({{ '/reference/statement.html#parsing' | relative_url }})

Return a ternary value indicating whether the cursor is open.

### Cursor Is In Range
{: #cursor_is_in_range}

```sql
CURSOR cursor_name IS [NOT] IN RANGE
```

_cursor_name_
: [identifier]({{ '/reference/statement.html#parsing' | relative_url }})

Return a ternary value indicating whether the cursor pointer is set to any existing record.
If the cursor is closed, then an error is occurred.
Before the first fetch, return UNKNOWN. 

## Automatic Type Casting
{: #automatic_type_casting}

Every Value has a primitive type. 
A value is converted to another primitive type as necessary.
For example, in arithmetic operations, both left-hand side value and right-hand side value are converted to float.
If the conversion failed, the value is converted to null.

Field values are imported as strings from csv.
You can cast value types expressly by using [cast functions]({{ '/reference/cast-functions.html' | relative_url }}).
This is useful to format output such as numbers in JSON format.
